## License for included geographic data

The geographic data provided with this package is derived from GeoNames
(www.geonames.org), which is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution
4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0).

A summary of this license and the full license text are available at
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

Further redistribution of the geographic data bundled with this package must
provide attribution to GeoNames. Redistribution includes any form of sharing
the data with third parties in original or modified form, including publishing,
distributing, or embedding it within other software. A simple link to
www.geonames.org is considered sufficient attribution under the terms of the
license.

Simply using this library to lookup data from pycountry does not produce
outputs that directly copy or modify the original licensed geographic data.
Thus, using the library to find pycountry data should not constitute a
derivative work that requires direct attribution under the terms of the
license.

## Main license

MIT License

Copyright (c) 2024 Daniel Mayo

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.
